## Data formats

The basis of any collaborative benchmark are 
A common format to exchange data between modules is critical, but also challenging. Sometimes, the differences can be minor, for example whether the samples within a gene expression matrix are put in the rows or in the column. In other cases, different data formats can have a significant impact on storage and/or the speed by which the data can be processed. 

- Common formats should be clearly defined, so that someone that develops a new module knows what the input will look like, even if it is generated by others
- Formats should be validated continuously throughout the benchmark, only modules which adhere to the formats should be included
- Formats should not be dictated by one "commitee", instead, anyone should be easy to add a new format although it is usually recommended to use the existing formats
- Formats should be able to change as the field progresses, given that it is impossible to know what the optimal format will look like at the start
- Having at least one common format, even if it is suboptimal for certain use cases, is better than having none at all.

Defining a format:
- Several good and bad examples
- Validation, in R or existing tools (JSON schema)

How can formats be **dynamic**:
- Extensions: New fields in a json file, or new columns in a csv file. Because this would not invalidate old formats, this can be easily added.
- Additions: New formats are added next to the old. For example, a new sparse expression format, next to the old "dense" expression format. Old modules won't work with these new datasets, unless:
   - The module also outputs the old format
   - We write convertors between formats, which are automatically called after some module is finished.
- Replacements: Replacing old formats requires some "versioning" similar as what is done elsewhere (eg. JSON schema, web APIs, HTML/XML versions, ...). Here also, convertors would be necessary for interopability, so that old modules still work. Alternatively, these old modules could be deprecated until they conform to the new format.
